On the whole, Jyutcitzi is preferable to Jyutping

Using Jyutping to teach Cantonese would indeed be extremely helpful for the education and proliferation of Cantonese. However, using Jyutping to accompany the current writing system for Cantonese, is still a very suboptimal solution. Since Cantonese would still be written entirely and only with Chinese characters, which are not phonetic, Jyutping could only play an annotating role, like Hanyu Pinyin for Mandarin. Jyutping, would not be *a* writing system for Cantonese. Jyutping would be used to teach Cantonese, and might be used to annotate Cantonese readings of Chinese characters, but it would not be used as the script in which Cantonese is written. This is entirely like how pinyin is used to annotate Mandarin texts as a reading aid, but the system itself would not be used to write any text. This effectively means that even with Jyutping, as long as Cantonese is written with and only with Chinese characters (sinoglyphs), fluency in Jyutping would not imply any literacy whatsoever. You can know your jyutping very well, but you would still be illiterate if presented a vernacular Cantonese newspaper article written entirely in Sinoglyphs.

This is why some advocate Cantonese to completely abandon Chinese characters as the script to write Cantonese. Some believe that it is far better to completely romanise Cantonese — i.e. write Cantonese entirely and only in jyutping. This would be akin to what the Vietnamese and the Zhuang have done.

This might appear to be the most straightforward and the simplest solution. After all, the logic seems undeniable. The Latin script has time and time again demonstrated its advantages, its flexibility, its impeccable infrastructure in terms of how every single computer on the planet is able to process it without any problems whatsoever. However, the cost of latinisation would be complete decimation and severance of one’s cultural heritage and cultural assets. This is not something to be glossed over. It would mean the decimation of access to old cultural products — which are used to generate new cultural products, project soft power, and allow the reaping of economic benefits.

The Cantonese Script Reform Society believes the best way forward, is to adopt a script that is compatible and mixed with the Sinoglyphs — just like how the Japanese’s writing system allows for the mixing of Kana and Kanji, how the Korean’s allows for the mixed use of Hangul and Hanja. We believe, Jyutcitzi, a phonetic script that is roughly based on the phonetic principle of *faancit*, offers the best way forward.

Jyutcitzi takes two Chinese characters, and combine them to form one single sound. For example the 廣 gwong2 in 廣東話 is composed of the initial (聲母) gw- and the final (音母) -ong. By combining 古[gw]u and 王w[ong] and composing them, we get one single glyph 古王. Tones would be optionally indicated by means of dakuten-like tone marks, (which are also like the tone marks in the bopomofo system that the Taiwanese use). In essence, we have created a phonetic system, in which Chinese characters would serve as phonetic letters. In particular, we have carefully selected the list of letters such that their spatial combination would yield the best aesthetics.

Jyutcitzi could also be combined with semantic components — just like 90% of all Chinese characters are phono-semantic characters, i.e. they are composed of a phonetic component (which roughly suggests the sound) and a semantic component (which roughly suggests the meaning). This means that Jyutcitzi is entirely in line with the evolutionary pathway of Chinese characters, and indeed with how Cantonese speakers have long been inventing new characters. In fact, this principle is not new at all. This principle of cleverly using Chinese characters to write one’s language has long been used by Hakka characters, Chu Nom (the Vietnamese characters), Zhuang characters, and even in certain Korean Gukja and Japanese Kanji as well. Certain script reform proposals from Japan in the late 19th century are exactly like this.

Most important of all, because of the 有邊讀邊 intuition (“pronounce by reading the phonetic component if there is one”) Cantonese speakers, especially Hong Kong Cantonese speakers have, this system, if adopted as *the* Cantonese script, could very well proliferate naturally and organically, without need of centralised education authority. Furthermore, given how this script can be used along Chinese characters, this script can seamlessly integrate into current Cantonese writing, thereby maximising cultural continuity and minimising cultural destruction. Most important of all, this script is phonetic, so it carries all the benefits of Jyutping, and that users of this script would be fully functionally literate.

And there is much left to be said about this script’s cultural potential and its capability in resolving the problems of 有音無字 (incidences in which there is no Chinese character for some spoken Cantonese word) once and for all, with a completely predictable, scalable, and logical system.

It is our vision to make Cantonese as dignified and as culturally and economically productive as Korean and Japanese. If our vision interests you, we would be very happy to answer your questions and tell you more about our project. We have already created an input system for this script, usable offline on microsoft docs. We are also working hard to bring this online so our reform can take off as speedily as we can. Cantonese deserves a script — because it deserves dignity.

PS: in the picture included in the link, the tone marks are represented through soochow numerals. This is an old version. The most updated version now uses bopomofo / dakuten tone marks to indicate tones.